From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one 71 recorded
live Friday, June 19, 2009.
Support for Hanselman it's just
provided by teller Akari. He
controls the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications online@wwwdottelerik.com.
In this episode, Scott talks
professionalism with Robert C. Martin. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman, And this
is another episode of Hansel
minutes. I'm sitting today with
Robert C. Martin founder of object mentor,
also known as uncle Bob
Martin, uncle Bob Martin on
Twitter. In fact, yes, that
you now have the dubious
distinction of being the only
guest who's been on the
show three times, which is
very exciting for you. Feel
good about that. And we're
here in Norway and you
gave a talk at the,
a, the keynote that's right.
You booted me out. I
did the keynote last year.
And then when they heard
that you were coming, they
gave me a very small
closet that I could speak
to a small group of
people in. So thank you
for that. No problem. And
what was your keynote about?
Well, it was entitled. Are
you a professional? It was
a discussion or a rather
me standing on stage yelling
at everybody telling them what
they needed to do to
be professionals. There was a
certain revival kind of vibe.
I mean, you had a
big crowd and a big
stage. We're actually here in
a very large indoor soccer
stadium. And you had people
pretty, pretty pumped up well
for Norwegians. Yes. As well
as everybody, or at least
two people clapping at the
end, there were very muted
people. And where were they
professionals? I mean, is the,
just that we're really not.
This is a very amateurish
industry that we are in
to some extent our industry
is very young and, and
probably has not yet earned
the right to call itself
a profession. We don't have
the kind of trappings that
our profession have. We don't
have the kind of disciplines
that a profession has. So
for example, if, if you
were to follow doctors around,
you would notice that they
have certain rituals that they
perform that have been ingrained
in their, in their practice
for decades. The ritual of
washing hands before surgery is
not simply, you know, a
doctor going in and getting
a bar of soap and
washing his hands. There's a
deep structure to what he
does. He takes the brush
and he brushes upside up
the side of his finger
10 times, and then down
the side of the same
finger, 10 times across the
nail 10 times and so
on. And it's a ritual
that other doctors watch while
you do it. Pilots have
a ritual of checklists and
checking each other out, and
they will fly very frequently
with other pilots where the
role of the fly along
pilot is to check the
check the pilot out on
his way. He works checklists
and the way he works,
his controls. So there's a
set of rituals and disciplines
and accepted behaviors that other
professions have. And we don't
seem to have that level
yet, although we're getting them,
especially with the advent of
extreme programming and agile development,
we have begun to adopt
some fairly stringent disciplines, things
like test driven development. And
although it's not universally accepted
where it is accepted, it
has become a discipline. And
the Mark of a professional
test driven developers know each
other, and they watch how
each other does the testing.
And we question it and
say, Oh, you do it
that way. Well, I do
it this way. And there's
this bond, The kind of
the secret handshake of, of
test driven developers or pair
programmers or any of the
other disciplines that have become
a common amongst agile developers.
So the, the keynote was
really about, okay, what are
these disciplines? And what is
it going to take to,
to really name ourselves as
professionals to call ourselves professionals.
And I went through a
whole set of them. And
the first one I I
chose was the, from the
doctor's oath, the Hippocratic oath,
which was first do no
harm. I said, you can't
be a professional. If in
your daily practice, you're doing
harm. And I, I talked
about the two kinds of
harm. You can do harm
to the function of a
program harm to the structure
of a program. And I
just talked for a very
long time about, you need
to be able to know
that you are doing no
harm to the function of
a program, and the way
you do that is to
have tests. And you also
need to know that you
are not doing any harm
to the structure of a
program. And the way you
do that is to constantly
change that structure so that
you know, that it's always
flexible. You are constantly mercilessly
refactoring systems, not necessarily because
they need to be refactored,
but because they need to
remain flexible. So it's rather
like I'm moving the gears
on a bicycle or, or,
or driving your car for
no other reason than to
keep it well, lubricated. And
in order to make those
kinds of changes, you need
tests. It all boils down
to tests. In the end,
I talked about the need
for continuous learning. That software
developers are, are like doctors
and lawyers, and that there's
no end to the learning
they need to do. You
cannot learn Java, come out
of school, learn Java and
think that you're a programmer.
And that's all you need
to know. The industry moves
faster than you can keep
up. There are new languages
all the time and new,
new all the time. You
must continually learn, but Pilots
and doctors have required classes
and number of hours and
a well while programmers are
putting, I think we mentioned
this in our last podcast
while programmers are putting, you
know, a Robert C. Martin comma, Microsoft
certified professional, Colorado server, high
trainer comma certified job, da
just in order to maintain
comma MD at the end
of your name, you need
to have continuous learning. You
need to, and flight people
are measured in number of
hours. I had proposed on
my blog a number of
years ago, we've part putting
the number of failed projects
that we've been on at
the end of our, our
names. One of the things
I thought was significant is
that you segwayed very smoothly.
You transitioned from the word
ritual into the word discipline.
And initially, as you were
saying, ritual, ritual ritual, I
was thinking, well, I think
of rituals as being leaned
on like, you know, crossing
yourself as you went to
a church or, you know,
brushing your teeth in the
morning. I mean, they, they
have purpose, but at the
same time, it becomes kind
of an automatic thing. Well,
discipline is as more as
a more formalized intentional thing.
I wonder if there's a
difference between the, the, you
know, the unconscious ritual versus
the intention behind a discipline.
I think there's a, a
difference. A ritual is something
that has, that is somewhat
arbitrary, whereas a discipline has
intent. So going back to
the doctor, brushing his fingers
10 times, why is it
the number 10? Why not
eight or nine and 11?
That's an arbitrary decision, but
it becomes a ritual. It
becomes ingrained. It's something we
do just because we do
it. Test-driven developers. Why do
we, why do we write
our tests first? Why don't
we write our tests just
after? Well, there's a, there's
a reason behind that. There's
a discipline behind it, but
it also becomes just a
ritual, something arbitrary. Why do
we like our methods to
be four or five lines
long? Well, there's a reason
behind that, but you know,
why is it four or
five and not eight or
nine? That's a ritual behind
that. So there are rituals
that are arbitrary in the
identify us they're decisions we've
made, and we don't care
to challenge again. So in
the last hundred years and
using the doctor metaphor and
taking this as far as
we can, it was the
creation of antibiotics, but also
the simple washing of hands,
the idea that if we're
going to do surgery, why
don't we just make sure
the room's clean? You know,
that was kind of like
if there was one thing
in the last several hundred
years that we've got right
around medicine, it's like, let's
be tidy, but was it,
is it testing is, is
test driven development and keeping
tests such that we can
feel confident in our systems
was the, is that the
invention of penicillin? Is that
the invention of the germ
is that washing your hands?
Have we not been washing
our hands for 50 years
of coding? And that's a
really interesting analogy. You can
use that in the next.
Thank you. So yeah, the,
the, it may be that
testing or test driven development
is the antibiotic is the,
is the miracle cure. And
obviously it's not the miracle
cure either of them, but
maybe that is the revolution.
It's certainly significant. And I
have been quoted a number
of times saying that if
you're not doing test driven
development, it's very difficult to
call yourself a professional. And
Jim Copeland called me on
the carpet for this one.
He didn't like that. I
said that in fact, he's
his position right now is
that test driven development is
destroying architectures because people are
writing tests to the abandoned
of any other kind of
thought and tearing their architectures
apart in the mad rush
to get tests to pass.
And he's got an interesting
point. That's an, that is
an interesting way to abuse
the ritual and lose the
intent behind the discipline. So
he and I had a,
a lovely debate at MIT
about six months ago, where
we explored that issue in
some detail. And of course,
Copeland is a brilliant felon.
I love him to death.
And two of us are
good friends and always will
be. And although I don't
think we settled the issue
between us. There was a
mutual understanding. I don't, I
don't see how, I mean
playing devil's advocate playing his
role. I mean, I don't
see how that's a defensible
position though. Oh, that, that
testing, I mean, I guess
testing is re, is rooted
in pragmatism and architecture while
it likes to think of
itself and being rooted in
pragmatism is really rooted in
another sense of the aesthetic.
There is the engineering of
the building, and then there's
the making the arches pretty
and making the whole thing
feel good and finding the
balance between like, Hey, wouldn't
it be great if all
these walls were curvy? Well,
you know, that wouldn't be
structurally sound. No, but wouldn't
it be great? You know,
one could say that that
means the basic engineering practices
and the building of buildings
as destroying the aesthetic of
buildings themselves, but you still
need them to stay up
and not collapse under their
own weight. Yeah. I think
complaints point, and I don't
want to put words in
his mouth is almost the
exact opposite of that. His
point would be that if
you're not thinking through the
architecture, if, if what you
are doing instead is ignoring
architecture and throwing tests together
and getting them to pass
you are destroying the thing
that will allow the building
to stay up because it's
the, the concentration on the
structure of the system and
in solid design decisions that
helped the, the, the system
maintain its structural integrity. And
he's right about that. You
cannot simply just throw a
whole bunch of tests together
and make them pass for,
for day, decade after decade
after decade and assume that
your system is going to
survive. We don't want to
evolve ourselves into hell. So
a good test driven developer
is always conscious of making
architectural decisions, always thinking of
the big picture. Ron Jeffries
likes to paraphrase a, a
saying, which was act, but
think globally, Both in, yeah.
In, in life, but also
in your code, in your
code, you know, or an
INI also known as the
NDA, Rihanna is walking around
yesterday, wearing a tee shirt
that proudly declared himself as
a non-coding architect. Oh, I
didn't see the short of
giving him a lot of
asks about that. Wow. And
that's why I'm bringing it
up today so we can
capture that on a, on
tape. But I thought that
was quite a funny thing.
I think, of course, everyone
knows that there are a
few people on the planet
who can code like this
gentlemen. So I think that
that was a bit of
a, of a push to,
to those non-coding architects out
there. It also had a
picture of a Pegasus. I'm
not sure if there was
a mythical, I saw the
Pegasus. I just didn't read
the other part. So underneath,
I'm not sure if the
message, This creature does exist.
Non-coding architects there, they exist
like flying horses too. The
gentleman that you were having
the argument with, who we
do not want to put
words in his mouth, but
sometimes when I find myself
onsite at large enterprises, as
a, as a former enterprise
architect myself, I really want
to just stop talking about
Vizio and UML and, and,
and tear the whiteboards down
and just start writing some
code. And I I'm, I'm
wondering if either maybe just
I'm a lousy architect or
there aren't enough architects that
really can code. It seems
like one is, you know,
how they would say that
one is promoted to the
level that is appropriate to
their own. Yes, yes. The
Peter principle, right. That, that
does that apply to architects.
Sure. As well. Unfortunately I
think it does in a
lot of cases, people have,
who used to be programmers
have graduated to become architects
and they start drawing diagrams
and designing API APIs and
handing them to programmers and,
and have a divorce themselves
from the necessity of making
things work. So then someone
might argue that in test
driven development, we're getting into
a certain kind of wag,
the dog situation here, where
someone thinks that they're in
charge, but all these developers
are down there writing tests
and they're pushing back against
my, my master plan. More
likely they're just ignoring it
all together, Which they probably
doing, regardless of whether they're
writing tests. Yes. I don't
think it's the tests that
have anything to do with
that good architects, in my
opinion, are architects that, that
do think about the high
level. They do go to
whiteboards. They do draw UML
on the, on the whiteboards.
They're thinking about large scale
structure. And then they're the
first ones to write the
code that makes sure that
that actually works. And then
they pair program with others
to show them how these
structures fit together. And they
live in the trenches with
the developers for at least
a certain amount of time.
And then perhaps they go
back and they design another
high level structure. And then
dive right back down into
the trenches. An architect that
loses coding skill becomes irrelevant.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman
with a word from our
sponsor. Do you know how
to build web 2.0 Ajax
applications with web 1.0 components?
You really can't. If you
want to do the next
generation web applications you'll need
next generation components. Just like
the ones that our friends
at Telerik have got their
rad controls for ESPN at
Ajax. It's a huge pack
of web controls built on
top of asp.net Ajax. That'll
add previously impossible performance interactivity
to your next project. The
new controls mirror, the Ajax
API from asp.net. So development
is really straightforward. The client
scripture shared. So loading time
is not a problem. If
you just set a couple
of properties and you'll be
able to automatically bind to
web services for a really
efficient operation, the new rad
editor from ESPN Ajax, Telerik
loads up to four times
faster than before. And the
new rad grid handles thousands
of records and just milliseconds,
but as always, it's best
to try for yourself. So
you can visit  dot
com slash ASP, net Ajax,
and download a trial. Thanks
a lot. Yeah, it's interesting.
I've always tried to learn
how to be a better
manager. And for some reason,
I always, I'm definitely a
manager by walking around management
by walking around is, you
know, I just love it
when I'm working for a
company where the president of
the company comes down from
the corner office and he
says, Hey, what's, what's cool.
I had a president like
that at my last company
that he would just literally
pop into your office and
say, all right, well, show
me what you got today.
And one day we might
show him a continuous integration
system. And one day we
might show him, you know,
just some garbage collection thing
that we thought was particularly
neat. And he appreciated that.
And when I work at
companies where it's clear that
the people in charge have
absolutely no idea how the
entity that they run truly
works. I ask myself, is
it necessary for the architect?
You understand the work of
the plumber and the electrician,
or, you know, can one
be successful with it? You
know, at what level of
abstraction in the entire stack,
do you, do you stop?
You can't know the whole,
the whole thing, right? Like
you look at like windows
seven and you've got Stevenson
Oskie who used to be
an MFC programmer. He was
a C plus plus programmer
who basically designed and wrote
the foundation classes. Now he's
a senior VP designing all
of windows seven. Is it
possible for him to know
the entire thing? No, No.
It's not impossible for him
to know and not appropriate
from kinda the whole thing.
On the other hand, even
though he is designing the
whole thing, I think it
would be appropriate, appropriate for
him to be able to
dive down into detail for
a day or two and
make sure that at the
bottom level, these decisions that
he's making at the top
level make sense. And he
should, to some extent live
in the bed that he's
making for everybody else. That
doesn't mean he has to
be down there, you know,
months at a time. Right.
But he should be able
to look at that code
down there, right. A little
bit of it and see
the pain that he's creating
for everybody else. You know?
And that's, that's, that's good
that you're saying that because
that's, in fact, what I
see as an internal developer,
as an internal person is
watching the mailing lists on
the public mailing list. You'll
get a note from Sanocki
one day, not as coming
down from, you know, corporate
VP world, but he'll say,
yeah, I went to Fry's
and I paid it in
her box and I put
together my own PC today
and I install seven. And
here's the two things that
didn't work. Here's the stack
dump. Here's what I think,
you know, and he's coming
in as Joe user, the
enthusiast who assembled a PC,
and then you'll see the
responses from people that are
like, Oh, should we respond
to the senior vice president?
But he's a geek just
like us. So then I'm
thinking, well, this is, this
is how it's supposed to
be. I think it is
how it's supposed to be.
As long as you are
responsible for technical matters, you
better be able to handle
it. It at the bottom
most level, as well as
the top. So going back
to the, the professionalism argument,
I'm trying to figure out
in the front, in the
stack from the top, whether
it be the architect or
the vice president of the
business person, all the way
down to the apprentice, we
talked a little bit about
the notion of coming up
with a formalized journeyman program
and an apprenticeship for programmers.
How do we bake professionalism
in to the entire stack?
Well, I, I think the,
the choice of the word
apprentice there is a very
good one. Cause I think
professionalism is, is baked into
the stack. By example, a
young person coming out of
school should not be thrown
in a room, should not
have meat thrown in and,
and expect code to come
out. And they should be
coupled with someone slightly more
senior taught the ropes. There
should be a lot of
pair programming, a lot of
code reviewing a mentoring and
coaching. And then at every
level thereafter, there should be
a, a mentoring association. Everybody
should know who their mentor
is at every level, going
up up the chain so
that you are inducted into
the halls of professionalism by
people who know it better
than you do. I don't
think you can take classes
on this. I don't think
you can absorb it from
books. Some of the things
certainly are you could get
from books, but the real
heart of discipline is in
working with someone else and
it absorbing their sweat into
your skin. Like the residents
program, that one has to
go through to become a
doctor. I think so. Yeah.
I mean, think that those
guys they're coupled together with
their residents and they can
go through hell too. So
I'm trying, so this is,
might be a backwards way
of thinking about it, but
it's also got me a
little sad. I'm trying to
think of a less professional
vocation than ours. I mean,
even a construction worker, you
gave him his tool belt
and his very first roofing
hammer, and then you assign
them a mentor and then
he goes, and he figures
it out. Even the guy
at McDonald's that works, the
fryer later is assigned a
mentor and works his way
up to burgers and then
possibly the drive through window.
Yep. But Nope, the least
professional profession that there is
Coming out of school. You're
expected to know everything and
be able to do everything.
I don't know if we're
the least we're very young
and the, the companies that
are trying to make use
of software really haven't figured
out how the heck they're
going to do that. And
we, as, as programmers, most
of us came out of
school or came out of
wherever. We thought we owned
the world and really haven't
understood that we needed to
have this level of discipline
until perhaps the last five
years. Why the last five
years, what was special about
the late night? Was it
the bubble that caused this
to happen? I think the
bubble might've been a stimulus
of it, but I think
I'm more, probably more important
than that as you've got
a bunch of, of people
like me who have been
programmers for damn near 40
years. And we're looking at,
at the situations we've created
and, and realize that, wait
a minute, you just can't
do this anymore. We can't
be the way we were
because we've got to keep
on leading the software profession
into the next several decades.
Did you get tired? We
have been doing this for
17 years and I'm tired.
I'm ready to be done.
I want to be an
architect. I'll have to. No,
no, no, no. I want
them to find me with
my nose stuck between the
keys of the keyboard. I
just, I want to code
and everything else I do
is ancillary so that I
can go back to my
laptop and write code. So
as long as your hands
still work, you're gonna, you're
going to code. I don't
know. I think in the
context of history you been
doing this, you said 40
years or so, and you've
probably got another 40 in
you. What do you think
it's going to look like?
Is it so are we
going to still be dicking
around with text editors in
40 years? Yeah. I think
we will be dicking around
with text editors for another
40 years. I don't think
it will be some radically
different thing. I think the
text editor editors will be
much, much better. Yeah. We're
not gonna be able to
just speak didn't bill Gates.
Promise me a computer. I
could talk to Not your
speaking is the, this is
the way we want to
do that. I think we
want to still maintain the
precision of single key strokes
and particular characters. So I
don't know if speaking is,
is the interface, The one
to many interface isn't working
for me, maybe that one
token in my head or
one, you know, series of
tokens. One thought when idiom
is, you know, 40 or
50 keeps my hands hurt.
You know, I've been doing
this awhile. My hands hurt.
See the, the YouTube, the
YouTube on how to build
Conway's game of life in
APL. No, this was an
astounding YouTube. It's, it's, it's
wonderful to watch because this
guy is describing it. And
all you see on the
YouTube is the screen and
he is speaking while he's
typing, but he's typing much
slower than he's speaking. The,
and you know, APL is
this language that has a
zillion characters to it. It's
like Chinese, a whole new
layout of the keyboard is
necessary in order to do
it. But here he is,
he's typing while he's speaking.
And every keystroke, there are
several words for really any
winds up implementing the entire
game. Conway's game of life
in a few dozen keystrokes.
Now APL is an old
language, but I think there's
something to this idea of
an extremely dense language where
every keystroke has a lot
of meaning to it. And
you, your, your programming effort
goes into the thought of
how to assemble a very
few tokens rather than to
assemble massive amounts of tenets
that we do now. Very
interesting. Yeah. That's why regular
expressions are so powerful. Yeah.
They are. You think a
long time about every single
character, You know, if regular
expressions are the Katakana and
what is the Kanji look
like? Right. I mean, the,
the, the example of Chinese
is excellent. The idea that
one glyphs can describe an
entire sentence. Yes. Yeah. And
Chinese is the existence proof
that it's possible to have
languages where you have very
meaningful glyphs. Right? Well, we
know people who speak English
or who use am Latin
based languages or transliterations are
used to using, you know,
two, three and four characters
to make one sound. People
who use celebrates like Katakana,
like Ethiopian I'm Herrick, like
Hebrew, like Arabic can make
one glyphs and get, you
know, the equivalent of two
sounds, a continent and a
vowel, or you might as
well just say, look, that
picture means rock. Or I
guess it was at, in,
in Chinese, a woman, there's
a symbol for woman. And
then you've put it three
times. It means gossip. I
read that. And that was,
I think it was in
bill Bryson's book called the
mother tongue. I did not
know that. I think I
may have got it wrong,
but it was, it was
a really great book by
a guy named bill Bryson
who wrote the, a, a
brief history of everything. And
he's got this great book
called the mother tongue. And
it was like, you know,
one woman, that's a woman.
Two is a conversation and
three has gossip. And the
life of three men means
grunts. Yeah. Basically, that's, that's
very interesting. Think of the
languages that are becoming popular
right now, languages like Ruby
and Haskell and closure. And
these languages are much denser
than the languages that we've
been used to a denser
than Java or C sharp
or VB or, or, or
languages that were in the
mainstream Languages. You just listed
off the last ones, C
sharp Java and C plus
plus are all essentially the
same language, no matter what
anyone says, it's all the
same language Pascal. And it's
just all the same C
so and well, Ruby isn't
radically different. It's definitely more
than one step withdrawn. Yes.
And then heading in the,
in the APL direction. You're
right. I wonder, I'll have
to get Andrew's Hillsburg on
the show and say, have
you thought about for each
being one cliff and why
you're there? It's just make
the whole looping construct. Just
one cliff cliff. And then
how about some significant white
space, if you don't mind.
That's really interesting idea. Yeah.
So being able to express
ourselves doesn't really change professionalism.
I'm trying to think. You
got me thinking about how
to, how one could express
themselves in so many fewer
type. Cause right now we're
in the process of making
tooling like ReSharper and code
rush, where I can push
the letter C hit space
and we generate all this
stuff. But once it's been
generated there, it's just texts.
The, the really interesting thing
about ReSharper and the, the
whole menagerie of refactoring browsers
is that they take this
glyphs concept. And instead of
making the glyphs elements of
the program, they make the
glyphs transformations of the program,
but usually only one way.
And then they struggle to
go on the way back.
So if you want to
rename a variable that's keystrokes.
So those things require that
they understand too much. For
example, ReSharper is basically reinvented
an entire C-sharp compiler and
tokenize or all it's something
that isn't, that isn't the
real one. Yes, that's right.
So things are great. And
then we introduced link, which
is a language within a
language, and then it gets
infused, right? So you get
this transformation when you type
in C you hit space
and you hit class curly
brace, curly brace, but maybe
I want to change that
into an interface. I can't
change the glyphs, the essence
of the thing that is
a class into an interface
as easily, because now it's
expanded. And to bring it
back to it's to its,
you know, to its essence,
its Glip form is really
possible. Well, I want to
explore, Oh, this is random.
Well, you never know what
a highly unprofessional a podcast
that we've put on today,
Bob. Well, thanks for sitting
down with me here in
Norway. This has been another
episode of Hansel minutes, content
free or provided to you
by Scott Hansman uncle Bob
Martin. And we will see
you again Next week.